In generic models of cosmological inflation, the geometry of spacetime is highly inhomogeneous on scales of many Hubble sizes, consisting of infinitely many causally disconnected “pocket universes.” The values of cosmological observables and even of the low-energy coupling constants and particle masses may vary among the pocket universes. String-theoretic landscape models present a similar structure of a “multiverse” where an infinite number of de Sitter, asymptotically flat (Minkowski), and anti-de Sitter pocket universes are nucleated via quantum tunneling. Since observers on Earth have no information about their location within the eternally inflating multiverse, the main question in this context has been that of obtaining statistical predictions for quantities observed at a “random” location.

In this book, I discuss the long-standing technical and conceptual problems arising within this statistical framework, known collectively as the “measure problem” in multiverse cosmology. After reviewing various existing approaches and mathematical techniques developed in the past two decades for studying these issues, I describe a new proposal for a measure in the multiverse, called the reheating-volume (RV) measure. The RV measure is based on approximating an infinite multiverse by a family of progressively larger but finite multiverses. Such multiverses occur seldom but are allowed by all cosmological “multiverse” models. I give a detailed description of the new measure and its applications to generic models of eternal inflation of random-walk type and to landscape scenarios. The RV prescription is formulated differently for scenarios with eternal inflation of the random walk type and for landscape scenarios. For models of random-walk inflation, the RV cutoff considers events where one has a finite (although large) total reheating volume to the future of an initial Hubble patch. For landscape scenarios, I propose to calculate the distribution of observable quantities in a landscape that is conditioned in probability to nucleate a finite total number of bubbles to the future of an initial bubble. In each case I show in a mathematically rigorous manner that the RV measure yields well-defined results that are invariant with respect to general coordinate transformations, independent of the initial conditions at the beginning of inflation, and free of the “youngness paradox” and the “Boltzmann brain” problems affecting some of the previously proposed measures. I derive analytic formulas for RV-regulated probability distributions that is suitable for numerical computations.
